>> Desjardins: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 26:
HILLARY CLINTON'S CAMPAIGN WILL
PARTICIPATE IN A RECOUNT IN
THREE STATES; AND FIDEL CASTRO,
A REVOLUTIONARY BOTH REVILED AND
REVERED, IS DEAD AT AGE 90.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
LISA DESJARDINS.
>> Desjardins: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TWO AND A HALF WEEKS AFTER
CONCEDING DEFEAT, HILLARY
CLINTON'S CAMPAIGN TODAY SAID IT
NOW SUPPORTS PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION RECOUNTS IN THREE
PIVOTAL AND CLOSELY-CONTESTED
STATES-- WISCONSIN, MICHIGAN AND
PENNSYLVANIA.
TODAY, CLINTON LAWYER MARC ELIAS
WROTE IN A POST ON THE WEB SITE
"MEDIUM" THAT DATA SCIENTISTS
WORKING FOR THE CAMPAIGN WERE
ALREADY CHECKING OFFICIAL VOTE
TOTALS IN EVERY STATE.
THEN, GREEN PARTY CANDIDATE JILL
STEIN FORMALLY FILED A WISCONSIN
RECOUNT PETITION YESTERDAY.
SHE ANNOUNCED PLANS TO DO THE
SAME IN MICHIGAN AND
PENNSYLVANIA BY MONDAY.
ELIAS SAID:
ELIAS SAID GOING FORWARD THE
CLINTON CAMPAIGN WILL BE
"REPRESENTED" IN ANY COURT
PROCEEDINGS AND ON THE GROUND.
SINCE THE ELECTION, CLINTON'S
LEAD IN THE NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE HAS GROWN.
SHE NOW HAS 2.2 MILLION MORE
VOTES NATIONWIDE THAN DONALD
TRUMP, BUT SHE'S BEHIND MR.
TRUMP BY A COMBINED 107,000
VOTES IN WISCONSIN, MICHIGAN AND
PENNSYLVANIA.
ELIAS NOTED THAT TRUMP'S LEAD IN
THE CLOSEST OF THOSE STATES,
MICHIGAN-- ABOUT 11,000 VOTES--
EXCEEDS THE NUMBER EVER OVERCOME
IN A U.S. ELECTION RECOUNT.
CLINTON WOULD NEED TO OVERTURN
THE CURRENT RESULTS IN ALL THREE
STATES TO REVERSE PRESIDENT-
ELECT TRUMP'S VICTORY IN THE
ELECTORAL COLLEGE.
MR. TRUMP TODAY CALLED THE
RECOUNT EFFORT "RIDICULOUS."
HE ADDED IN A WRITTEN STATEMENT:
FIDEL CASTRO RULED THE ISLAND OF
CUBA WITH AN IRON FIST FOR
ALMOST HALF A CENTURY, HANDING
POWER OVER TO HIS BROTHER EIGHT
YEARS AGO.
CUBANS CALLED HIM SIMPLY
"FIDEL."
HE WAS A THORN IN THE SIDE OF
TEN AMERICAN PRESIDENTS, A
DEFIANT COMMUNIST ALLIED WITH
THE SOVIET UNION IN THE COLD
WAR, AND A DICTATOR WHO
IMPRISONED AND KILLED HIS
ENEMIES AND DROVE A MILLION OF
HIS CITIZENS TO FLEE.
CASTRO WAS THE FATHER OF A
REVOLUTION THAT DELIVERED
HEALTHCARE AND EDUCATION TO HIS
PEOPLE BUT DEPRIVED THEM OF A
BETTER QUALITY OF LIFE BY MOST
OTHER MEASURES, AND, MOST OF
ALL, OF POLITICAL FREEDOM.
LATE LAST NIGHT, PRESIDENT RAUL
CASTRO WENT ON CUBAN STATE
TELEVISION TO ANNOUNCE THE DEATH
OF HIS OLDER BROTHER AND
PREDECESSOR, BUT HE GAVE NO
CAUSE.
FIDEL CASTRO HAD SUFFERED FROM
AN INTESTINAL DISEASE FOR OVER A
DECADE.
RAUL CASTRO ANNOUNCED NINE DAYS
OF NATIONAL MOURNING AND SAID
HIS BROTHER WOULD BE CREMATED,
WITH HIS ASHES INTERRED IN THE
CITY OF SANTIAGO, NEAR WHERE HE
GREW UP.
IN HAVANA, FLAGS ARE AT HALF
STAFF AND THE MOOD HAS BEEN
SOMBER, THE STREETS LARGELY
EMPTY OF PEOPLE AND TRAFFIC.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA EXPRESSED
HIS CONDOLENCES TO THE CASTRO
FAMILY.
MR. OBAMA, WHO BEGAN A PROCESS
TO NORMALIZE RELATIONS WITH CUBA
TWO YEARS AGO AND VISITED THE
ISLAND THIS YEAR, ADDED:
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
CALLED CASTRO:
MR. TRUMP SAID:
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE PAUL RYAN
SAID:
BY CONTRAST, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN SAID:
CHINA'S COMMUNIST LEADER, XI
JINPING, SAID:
AND BOLIVIA'S SOCIALIST
PRESIDENT, EVO MORALES, SAID:
AND IN THE SECTION OF MIAMI
KNOWN AS "LITTLE HAVANA,"
THOUSANDS OF CUBAN-AMERICANS
TOOK TO THE STREETS TO CELEBRATE
CASTRO'S DEATH, CHANTING "CUBA
SI, CASTRO NO."
>> I GUESS I SHOULDN'T BE HAPPY
BECAUSE A PERSON HAS DIED, BUT
HE SEPARATED MY FAMILY.
MY PARENTS NEVER GOT TO SEE CUBA
AGAIN.
SO, TODAY, I REJOICE FOR THIS.
>> THE STREETS ARE SO JOYOUS
BECAUSE SEVERAL GENERATIONS OF
CUBANS ARE CELEBRATING THE DEATH
OF A DICTATOR-- NOT THE DEATH OF
A HUMAN BEING, BUT THE DEATH OF
A DICTATOR.
>> Desjardins: NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND'S HARI SREENIVASAN HAS
MORE ON FIDEL CASTRO'S LIFE.
>> FIDEL!
>> Sreenivasan: HIS COMMUNIST
REVOLUTION OUTLASTED TEN
AMERICAN PRESIDENCIES AND
WITHSTOOD HALF A CENTURY OF
AMERICAN ECONOMIC EMBARGO.
HE SURVIVED NUMEROUS ATTEMPTS TO
OVERTHROW OR ASSASSINATE HIM.
HE FOUGHT OFF ONE U.S.-BACKED
INVASION AT A LITTLE KNOWN BEACH
CALLED PLAYA GIRON, IN WHAT
AMERICANS CAME TO KNOW AS THE
BAY OF PIGS, AND HELPED UNLEASH
A SUPERPOWER CONFRONTATION BY
INSTALLING SOVIET MISSILES IN
CUBA.
THE WORLD HAD SEEN LITTLE OF THE
CUBAN LEADER IN THE PAST DECADE
AFTER SERIOUS INTESTINAL ILLNESS
STRUCK IN 2006.
IN 2008, HE STEPPED DOWN AS
PRESIDENT, PUTTING HIS BROTHER,
ARMY HEAD RAUL CASTRO, AT THE
COUNTRY'S HELM.
THIS FEEBLE OLD MAN IN A TRACK
SUIT WAS A PALE SHADOW OF THE
OVERCONFIDENT 32-YEAR-OLD
GUERILLA WHO SHOOK UP THE
WESTERN HEMISPHERE.
FIDEL CASTRO TRIUMPHANTLY TOOK
CONTROL OF CUBA ON JANUARY 1,
1959.
HE ROLLED INTO HAVANA ATOP A
TANK A WEEK LATER.
HE CAME DOWN FROM HIS GUERILLA
STRONGHOLD IN THE SIERRA MAESTRA
MOUNTAINS, JOINED BY HIS PARTNER
IN REVOLUTION, THE ARGENTINE CHE
GUEVARA, AND A SMALL REBEL ARMY.
THEY HAD TOPPLED THE RIGHT WING
DICTATOR FULGENCIO BATISTA, WHO
HAD BEEN IN AND OUT OF POWER IN
CUBA FOR 25 YEARS.
CASTRO QUICKLY NATIONALIZED
U.S.-OWNED COMPANIES AND
PROPERTY IN CUBA, ALONG WITH
CHURCH HOLDINGS AND THE FARMS
AND BUSINESSES OF WEALTHY AND
MIDDLE CLASS CUBANS.
THE U.S. RESPONDED WITH AN
ECONOMIC BOYCOTT THAT LASTED
DECADES, AND CASTRO BEGAN AN
ALLIANCE WITH AMERICA'S
SUPERPOWER RIVAL, THE SOVIET
UNION.
>> Sreenivasan: DEPARTING
PRESIDENT DWIGHT EISENHOWER
SEVERED ALL LINKS WITH CUBA.
>> THERE IS A LIMIT TO WHAT THE
UNITED STATES AND SELF-RESPECT
CAN ENDURE.
THAT LIMIT HAS NOW BEEN REACHED.
OUR FRIENDSHIP FOR THE CUBAN
PEOPLE IS NOT AFFECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HARDSHIPS
PLACED UPON THE CUBAN ECONOMY,
AND CASTRO'S REPRESSION OF HIS
CUBAN OPPOSITION, SPARKED A
SERIES OF MASS MIGRATIONS THAT
WOULD PROFOUNDLY AFFECT THE
UNITED STATES AND THE FUTURE OF
U.S.-CUBA RELATIONS.
THE NEW AMERICAN PRESIDENT, JOHN
KENNEDY, PICKED UP ONE OF HIS
PREDECESSOR'S PLANS, AN ARMED
OVERTHROW OF CASTRO.
THE C.I.A. TRAINED AN ARMY OF
1,200 CUBAN EXILES TO INVADE AND
BEGIN A POPULAR UPRISING.
ON APRIL 17, 1961, THE SMALL,
COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARY FORCE
STORMED THE BEACH ON CUBA'S
SOUTHEAST COAST.
MANY CUBAN PEOPLE RALLIED TO
CASTRO, AND HIS FORCES QUICKLY
PUT DOWN THE BAY OF PIGS
INVASION.
IT WAS A DISASTER FOR THE NEW
KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION.
BUT THE FOLLOWING YEAR BROUGHT A
NEW CONFRONTATION AND EVEN MORE
DANGER.
ON OCTOBER 16, 1962, U.S. SPY
PLANES PHOTOGRAPHED THE
CONSTRUCTION OF A SOVIET MISSILE
SITE IN CUBA.
A CRISIS ENSUED WHICH BROUGHT
THE WORLD THE CLOSEST IT HAD
EVER COME TO NUCLEAR
ANNIHILATION.
A U.S. NAVAL BLOCKADE, CALLED A
"QUARANTINE," WAS FORCED ON
CUBA.
KENNEDY TOOK TO THE AIRWAVES AND
WARNED OF THE CONSEQUENCES.
>> TO HALT THIS OFFENSIVE BUILD-
UP, A STRICT QUARANTINE ON ALL
OFFENSIVE MILITARY EQUIPMENT
UNDER SHIPMENT TO CUBA IS BEING
INITIATED.
IT SHALL BE THE POLICY OF THIS
NATION TO REGARD ANY NUCLEAR
MISSILE LAUNCHED FROM CUBA
AGAINST ANY NATION IN THE
WESTERN HEMISPHERE AS AN ATTACK
BY THE SOVIET UNION ON THE
UNITED STATES, REQUIRING A FULL
RETALIATORY RESPONSE UPON THE
SOVIET UNION.
>> Sreenivasan: IT TOOK 12 DAYS
OF INTENSE NEGOTIATIONS AND U.N.
DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS, BUT THE
SOVIETS BACKED DOWN AND PROMISED
TO REMOVE THE MISSILES FROM CUBA
IN RETURN FOR A U.S. COMMITMENT
NOT TO INVADE THE CARIBBEAN
ISLAND.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ROBERT MacNEIL,
WHO WAS IN HAVANA AT THE TIME,
ASKED FIDEL CASTRO ABOUT THE
MISSILE CRISIS IN A 1985
NEWSHOUR INTERVIEW.
>> WHEN THE CRISIS WAS AT ITS
VERY HEIGHT, DID YOU PERSONALLY
THINK THAT... DID YOU BELIEVE
THAT NUCLEAR WAR WAS A
POSSIBILITY ON ONE OF THOSE
DAYS?
DID YOU BELIEVE, AS YOU SAT HERE
IN HAVANA, DID YOU BELIEVE THAT?
>> (translated): YES, I
BELIEVED THAT WAS A POSSIBILITY.
>> WHAT DID YOU FEEL ABOUT YOUR
ROLE IN HAVING BROUGHT IT TO
THAT POINT?
>> (translated): IT WAS NOT
ME.
IT WAS THE UNITED STATES THAT
LED US TO THAT POINT.
IT WAS THE UNITED STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: CASTRO PUT DOWN
DISSENT, ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
WORSENED, EMIGRATION TO THE
UNITED STATES SURGED.
EXILES AND THEIR FAMILIES FILLED
AMERICAN CITIES AND PROSPERED IN
PLACES LIKE MIAMI'S "LITTLE
HAVANA."
THESE IMMIGRANTS BECAME A FORCE
IN AMERICAN POLITICS, STANDING
AGAINST ANY EFFORTS TO LIFT THE
EMBARGO OR REOPEN DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS.
(CHEERS)
ALL THE WHILE, CASTRO ENDURED.
HE RALLIED HIS FAITHFUL
SUPPORTERS IN THE CAPITAL WITH
HIS TRADEMARK HOURS-LONG, FIERY
SPEECHES FULL OF NATIONALIST AND
SOCIALIST RHETORIC.
>> (SPEAKING SPANISH)
>> Sreenivasan: CROWDS OF
THOUSANDS TURNED OUT TO LISTEN.
EVEN WITH MASSIVE SOVIET
SUBSIDIES, ANOTHER DRAMATIC
ECONOMIC DOWNTURN HIT CUBA IN
1980, AND CASTRO SAID ANYONE WHO
WANTED TO LEAVE CUBA COULD DO SO
BY BOAT.
AGAIN, A HUGE WAVE OF IMMIGRANTS
HEADED TO THE UNITED STATES IN
WHAT BECAME KNOWN AS THE MARIEL
BOATLIFT.
MANY OF THESE WERE PRISONERS AND
CONVICTS.
BUT CASTRO CONTINUED TO HOLD A
TIGHT GRIP ON HIS PEOPLE THROUGH
RESTRICTIONS ON FREE SPEECH AND
FREE PRESS.
HE QUIETED THE OPPOSITION WITH
IMPRISONMENT, AND HE DID NOT
DENY THAT HIS JAIL HELD
POLITICAL PRISONERS WHEN THE
NEWSHOUR'S ROBERT MacNEIL ASKED
HIM IN 1985.
>> (translated): YES, WE HAVE
THEM.
WE HAVE A FEW HUNDREDS POLITICAL
PRISONERS.
IS THAT A VIOLATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS?
THOSE THAT HAVE INFILTRATED
THROUGH OUR COASTS, THOSE THAT
HAVE BEEN TRAINED BY THE C.I.A.
TO KILL, TO PLACE BOMBS, DO WE
HAVE THE RIGHT TO PUT THEM TO
TRIAL OR NOT?
ARE THEY POLITICAL PRISONERS?
THEY'RE SOMETHING MORE THAN
POLITICAL PRISONERS.
THEY'RE TRAITORS TO THE
HOMELAND.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE
COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION IN
THE EARLY 1990s, SUBSIDIZED
SUGAR PRICES AND CHEAP OIL FROM
CUBA'S COMMUNIST ALLY
DISAPPEARED.
CUBANS WERE AGAIN ASKED TO
TIGHTEN THEIR BELTS.
CASTRO NEEDED NEW FRIENDS.
IN 1998, THE COMMUNIST LEADER
CAME FACE-TO-FACE WITH
COMMUNISM'S ARCH RIVAL.
CASTRO WELCOMED POPE JOHN PAUL
II TO CUBA.
THE POPE ADDRESSED THE CUBAN
PEOPLE AT A MASS WHERE THOUSANDS
TURNED OUT.
HE CALLED FOR AN END TO HUMAN
RIGHTS ABUSES AND DREW THE
WORLD'S ATTENTION TO THE PLIGHT
OF THE CUBAN PEOPLE.
CASTRO DID COME TO LOOSEN SOME
RESTRICTIONS ON THE CATHOLICS IN
CUBA; THE POPE'S MESSAGE DID
LITTLE ELSE TO CHANGE THE DAY-
TO-DAY LIVES OF CUBANS.
BUT IN LATER YEARS, CASTRO FOUND
NEW ALLIES IN THE HEMISPHERE...
>>VIVA LA REPUBLICA BOLIVIARANA
DE VENEZUELA!
VIVA CUBA!
>> Sreenivasan: ...IN LEFTIST
LEADERS LIKE VENEZUELA'S HUGO
CHAVEZ AND BOLIVIA'S EVO
MORALES, WHO SAID THEY WERE
INSPIRED BY THE CUBAN REVOLUTION
AND JOINED CASTRO IN DELIGHTED
DEFIANCE OF UNCLE SAM.
FIDEL'S SLOW FADE BEGAN ON JULY
31, 2006, WHEN HE CEDED POWER TO
HIS YOUNGER BROTHER, RAUL.
THE NEWS THAT CASTRO HAD
UNDERGONE SUCCESSFUL SURGERY FOR
GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING AIRED
OVER STATE TELEVISION.
IN THE STATES, AMONG THE EXILE
AND CUBAN AMERICAN POPULATION,
THERE WAS ANXIETY ALONG WITH
JUBILATION AT THE IDEA THAT THIS
COULD BE THE END.
BUT SOON, CASTRO ALLOWED HIMSELF
TO APPEAR IN PHOTOS FROM HIS
HOSPITAL BED AND EVEN
ENTERTAINED FRIENDS WHILE
CONVALESCING.
WHEN HE WAS UP AND MOVING IN
OCTOBER OF 2006, THE VIDEO
CAPTURED A FRAIL AND AGING MAN
IN A MUCH WEAKENED STATE TRYING
TO LOOK HEALTHY.
IN DECEMBER 2006, CUBANS
CELEBRATED THE 50th ANNIVERSARY
OF THE REVOLUTION AND A BELATED
BIRTHDAY WITHOUT THE GUEST OF
HONOR WHO WAS STILL TOO ILL TO
ATTEND.
HE DIDN'T REAPPEAR IN THE PUBLIC
EYE UNTIL 2010, AND, ALMOST A
YEAR LATER, HE OFFICIALLY
RESIGNED AS THE COMMUNIST
PARTY'S LEADER.
IN 2012, CUBA HOSTED ANOTHER
PONTIFF, POPE BENEDICT.
CASTRO WAS TOO ILL TO ATTEND A
LARGE MASS WHICH DREW THOUSANDS,
BUT THE PAIR DID HOLD A MEETING.
>> THESE 50 YEARS HAVE SHOWN
THAT ISOLATION HAS NOT WORKED.
IT'S TIME FOR A NEW APPROACH.
>> Sreenivasan: THEN, IN
DECEMBER OF 2014, PRESIDENT
OBAMA ANNOUNCED THE UNITED
STATES WOULD REESTABLISH
DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH CUBA.
THAT MEANT OPENING UP AN EMBASSY
IN HAVANA, EXPANDING ECONOMIC
TIES AND EASING TRAVEL BANS.
THE FIRST STEP WAS A PRISONER
SWAP BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES.
BUT THE DEAL WAS MADE WITH
FIDEL'S BROTHER, PRESIDENT RAUL
CASTRO.
IT WAS THE FIRST MAJOR
DISCUSSION BETWEEN PRESIDENTS OF
THE U.S. AND CUBA SINCE 1961,
AND FIDEL WAS STILL NOWHERE TO
BE SEEN.
DESPITE HIS DECLINE FROM PUBLIC
LIFE AND POLITICS, THE COMMUNIST
ICON CONTINUED TO PUBLISH
EDITORIAL COLUMNS AND ASSUMED
THE ROLE OF AN ELDER STATESMAN.
>> Desjardins: READ MORE ABOUT
FIDEL CASTRO'S IMPACT ON
HISTORY, AND REACTIONS TO HIS
DEATH IN THE CUBAN COMMUNITY IN
MIAMI, AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Desjardins: FOR MORE ON FIDEL
CASTRO'S FOOTHOLD IN HISTORY AND
WHAT IT MEANS NOW, I'M JOINED
HERE IN THE STUDIO BY CARLA
ROBBINS, AN ADJUNCT SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
SHE'S ALSO A PULITZER PRIZE-
WINNING JOURNALIST FORMERLY WITH
"THE NEW YORK TIMES," "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL" AND "U.S. NEWS &
WORLD REPORT."
AND IN WASHINGTON, WILLIAM
LEOGRANDE IS A PROFESSOR OF
GOVERNMENT AND A SPECIALIST IN
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS AT
AMERICAN UNIVERSITY.
HE'S THE AUTHOR OF "BACK CHANNEL
TO CUBA: THE HIDDEN HISTORY OF
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN WASHINGTON
AND HAVANA."
A VERY STRONG PANEL.
THANK YOU BOTH FOR JOINING US ON
A HOLIDAY WEEKEND.
LET ME START WITH YOU, CARLA.
FIDEL CASTRO WAS DIVISIVE IN
LIFE, AND NOW EVEN IN DEATH.
WE'VE SEEN REACTIONS AROUND THE
WORLD VARY, NOT JUST IN THE
WESTERN WORLD AND THE DEVELOPING
WORLD BUT WE'VE SEEN EVEN THE
PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA HAVE
SOME WORDS OF PRAISE FOR FIDEL
CASTRO AND HIS DEATH, VERY
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT WE'VE SEEN
FROM MOST AMERICAN LEADERS.
WHAT DO YOU THINK FIDEL CASTRO,
IN THE END, REPRESENTED IN HIS
LIFE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, IF YOU
THOUGHT ABOUT IT, CUBA A VERY
SMALL COUNTRY, AND IT DOESN'T
PRODUCE ANY STRATEGIC MATERIALS
THAT ANYONE WOULD REALLY CARE
ABOUT IT, BUT IT WAS 90 MILES
AWAY FROM THE UNITED STATES WITH
FIDEL CASTRO, AND IT WAS IN THE
MIDST OF THE COLD WAR THAT HE
CAME TO POWER.
SO HIS ABILITY TO SORT OF
MANIPULATE THAT RELATIONSHIP,
AND HE WAS SUCH A SORT OF ROCK
STAR IN THE WAY THAT HE DID IT,
SO IT WAS ALWAYS THIS SORT OF
SYMBOLISM OF CHALLENGING
AMERICAN IMPERIALISM AND BEING
IN THE FACE OF THE UNITED
STATES.
AND HE WAS THAT WAY UNTIL THE
VERY END.
SO IT WAS SORT OF THE ROCK STAR
FIDEL, EVEN THOUGH AT HOME HE
WAS PRETTY MUCH A THUG.
>> Desjardins: THE ROCK STAR.
CAN WILLIAM LEOGRANDE, HE TALKED
ABOUT THE POWER OF PROPAGANDA.
WHAT DO WE BEEN THE FACTS?
>> WHEN HE TOOK POWER IN 1959,
HE HAD TWO OBJECTIVES-- ONE WAS
TO TOTALLY REFORM CUBA'S CORRUPT
AND UNEQUAL SOCIAL ORDER AND THE
OTHER WAS TO GAIN INDEPENDENCE
FROM THE UNITED STATES.
IN THE EARLY YEARS HE MADE A LOT
OF PROGRESS ON BOTH OF THESE.
HE KICKED THE AMERICANS OUT AND
ABOLISHED CAPITALISM IN CUBA
REPLACING IT WITH SOVIET-STYLE
COMMUNISM.
BUT THE REALITY IS OVER TIME
THOSE GOALS BEGAN TO ACTUALLY
ERODE.
WE SEE NOW THAT HIS BROTHER,
RAUL CASTRO, IS MOVING TOWARDS
MORE OF A MARKET SOCIALISM ON
THE ORDER OF CHINA OR VIETNAM.
SO THE OLD-STYLE SOVIET MODEL
JUST DIDN'T WORK.
AND SINCE DECEMBER 2014, CUBA
AND THE UNITED STATES HAVE BEEN
RE-ENGAGING WITH ONE ANOTHER.
U.S. VISITORS ARE GOING DOWN
THERE BY THE THOUSANDS AND U.S.
BUSINESSES ARE JUST CHOMPING AT
THE BIT TO GET INTO CUBA.
>> Desjardins: HOW DID FIDEL
CASTRO DO THIS?
IT'S BEEN MANY DECK EPIDEMICS
SINCE CUBAN PEOPLE HAVE SUFFERED
FROM ECONOMIC DISTRESS AND
POLITICAL REPRESSION?
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S FASCINATING.
WHEN YOU THINK THAT THE WALL
FELL IN '89, THAT THE SOVIET
UNION UNRAVELED 25 YEARS AGO,
AND THE CUBANS WENT THROUGH A
VERY TOUGH TIME, THAT SPECIAL
PERIOD WHEN THEY DIDN'T HAVE
THAT FINANCIAL SUPPORT THAT KEPT
CASTRO IN POWER FOR A VERY LONG
TIME.
HOW DID THEY DO IT?
IT'S AN ISLAND.
THEY COULD CONTROL AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT BECAUSE IT WAS AN ISLAND.
I THINK THE POWER OF HIS
PERSONALITY WAS A BIG PART OF
IT.
BUT AS BILL SAID, ALSO, THEY DID
MAKE SOME PRETTY SIGNIFICANT
CHANGES SOCIALLY SO THERE WERE A
LOT OF TRUE BELIEVERS THERE FOR
A LONG TIME.
I WILL TELL YOU THE LAST TIME I
WAS THERE, WHICH WAS THE LAST
TIME THEY LET ME IN, WHICH WAS
THE MID-90s, THERE WAS AN
AWFUL LOT OF PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN
BELIEVERS IN THE REVOLUTION WHO
FINALLY SAID, "ENOUGH WAS
ENOUGH."
WOULD I HAVE PREDICTED 20 YEARS
HENCE THAT THEY WOULD STILL BE
IN POWER?
THAT IS PRETTY SURPRISING.
>> Desjardins: BILL, WHAT
ABOUT THAT.
WHAT DO WE KNOW WHAT THE CUBAN
PEOPLE THINK RIGHT NOW ABOUT THE
CASTRO REGIME?
>> THE OLDER GENERATION, PEOPLE
OVER 60, WHO REMEMBER THE OLD
REGIME AND WHO GREW UP IN THE
1960s AND EVEN IN THE 70s,
WHEN THERE WAS A LOT OF
ENTHUSIASM FOR THE REVOLUTION
AND WHEN THE ECONOMY WAS DOING
BETTER, THEY TEND TO HAVE A LOT
OF AFFECTION STILL FOR FIDEL
CASTRO AND RAUL CASTRO.
AND IN THE FEW PUBLIC OPINION
POLLS THAT HAVE BEEN DONE ON THE
ISLAND BY OUTSIDERS, THAT
GENERATION IS STILL SUPPORTIVE.
BUT THE YOUNGER GENERATION IS
BADLY DISAFFECTED.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO GREW UP IN
THE SPECIAL PERIOD WHEN THE
ECONOMY WAS A DISASTER.
AND FOR THEM, THE REVOLUTION
MEANS PRIVATION.
AND A LOT OF THEM DON'T SEE A
LOT OF FUTURE FOR THEMSELVES IN
CUBA, AND THAT'S WHY SO MANY OF
THEM ARE LEAVING.
>> Desjardins: CARLA, YOU
KNOW, IT'S REMARKABLE TO ME,
THIS WAS A MAN WHO WAS THE
LONGEST IN POWER OF ANY 20th
CENTURY RULER, EXCEPT FOR
MONARCHS.
>> IT'S REMARKABLE WHAT
REPRESSION CAN DO FOR YOU.
>> Desjardins: AND I THINK MY
QUESTION TO YOU IS THEN, WHAT DO
YOU THINK HIS LEGACY MAY BE NOW,
BEYOND HIS ABILITY TO STAY IN
POWER?
HE SAID IN APRIL IN HIS FAREWELL
ADDRESS THAT, "CUBAN COMMUNISM'S
LEGACY WILL LIVE ON."
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN, AND IS
THERE SUCH A THING?
>> I THINK THAT'S SORT OF
DELUSIONAL.
EVENTUALLY, IT WILL UNRAVEL.
I MEAN, IN THE WORLD OF THE
INTERNET, EVEN BEING AN ISLAND,
YOU CANNOT BE THAT SEPARATED.
AND AS BILL SAID, THIS
GENERATION, THEY WANT OUT.
THEY WANT IT TO BE OVER WITH.
THEY DON'T WANT THAT LEVEL OF
PRIVATION.
AND THEY CERTAINLY DON'T WANT TO
BE CUT OFF FROM THE REST OF THE
WORLD THERE.
YOU KNOW, THERE WERE CHANGES
THAT TOOK PLACE-- EDUCATIONAL
CHANGES, HEALTH CARE CHANGES--
YOU KNOW, IT'S A DIFFERENT
COUNTRY, CERTAINLY, THAN IT WAS
UNDER BATISTA.
BUT THE JOKE WENT ON FOR TOO
LONG.
WILL CUBAN COMMUNISM LIVE
FOREVER?
I CERTAINLY HOPE NOT.
>> Desjardins: MY QUESTION TO
YOU, BILL, IS NOW HOW DO YOU
THINK THIS WILL CHANGE THINGS?
DOES THE DEATH OF FIDEL CASTRO
HASTEN REFORMS?
WHAT DOES THIS ALL MEAN FOR
CUBA?
>> WELL, FIDEL CASTRO WAS SUCH A
SYMBOL, I THINK HIS PASSING
WILL, ON THE U.S.-CUBA RELATIONS
SIDE, TAKE SOME OF THE HEAT OUT
OF THE ANIMOSITY, PARTICULARLY
AMONG SOME OF THE HARD LINERS IN
MIAMI FOR WHOM FIDEL PERSONALLY
WAS JUST AN OBJECT OF ABJECT
HATRED.
ON THE ISLAND ITSELF, I THINK
HIS ENDURING LEGACY IS THAT HE
MADE CUBA A FULLY INDEPENDENT
COUNTRY FROM THE UNITED STATES.
THE LAST COUNTRY IN LATIN
AMERICA REALLY TO GAIN ITS FULL
INDEPENDENCE.
>> Desjardins: CARLA, TALKING
ABOUT SYMBOLISM, FIDEL CASTRO
PASSED AWAY JUST AS WE SEE MOST
OF THE SYMBOL OF CAPITALISM
ITSELF, OR CERTAINLY
ARISTOCRACY, DONALD TRUMP,
RISING TO POWER.
DOES THIS-- DO YOU THINK THIS IS
AN OPENING NOW IN TERMS OF THE
UNITED STATES' STANCE TOWARDS
CUBA TO LEAD TO A MORE HARD LINE
FROM PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP?
>> RIGHT NOW, HE'S TAKING THE
VERY HARD LINE.
HE CARRIED THE CUBAN AMERICAN
COMMUNITY IN FLORIDA THERE BY
52%, ACCORDING TO THE EXIT
POLLS.
SO MAYBE HE'LL TAKE THE HARD
LINE ITSELF.
YOU KNOW, IF I HAD TO BET, I
THINK THE TRAIN'S ALREADY
DEPART.
I THINK THAT BASICALLY AMERICAN
BUSINESSES ARE INTERESTED IN
GOING THERE AND, YOU KNOW,
AMERICANS ARE INTERESTED IN
GOING THERE.
I DON'T EXPECT THERE'S GOING TO
BE A MASSIVE ROLL-BACK.
>> Desjardins: AND, BILL, DO
YOU THINK IN THE NEXT, LET'S SAY
EVEN SIX MONTHS, WE'LL SEE ANY
CHANGING OF THE PACE IN CUBA?
>> WELL, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
WAIT AND SEE WHICH DONALD TRUMP
TAKES THE WHITE HOUSE.
IS IT THE POLITICIAN WHO
PROMISED CUBAN AMERICANS THAT HE
WOULD ROLL BACK EVERYTHING
BARACK OBAMA DID IN CUBA?
OR IS IT THE BUSINESSMAN WHO IN
THE 1990s WANTED TO GET INTO
CUBA AND DO BUSINESS HIMSELF AND
JUST AS RECENTLY AS SEPTEMBER
SAID HE THOUGHT AN OPENING TO
CUBA WAS FINE, AS LONG AS WE
NEGOTIATED A GOOD DEAL.
>> Desjardins: WILLIAM
LEOGRANDE OF THE AMERICAN
UNIVERSITY, AND CARLA ROBBINS OF
THE COUNCIL OF FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
THANK YOU BOTH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> GLAD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Desjardins: ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND TOMORROW, OUR
JEFFREY BROWN SITS DOWN WITH
SINGER-SONGWRITER NORAH JONES TO
TALK ABOUT HER EVOLVING CRAFT,
HER MUSICAL ROOTS, AND HER NEW
ALBUM.
AND THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M LISA DESJARDINS.
GOOD NIGHT.